---
published: true
---
My somewhat verbose blog entry on moving from MacOS to Fedora 26 with the Gnome Desktop Environment. Touching on things that mattered to me but are small and what could be described as niggles. 

### Intro

So this is something I have been wanting to write for so long and have never had the time or the proper know-how (still working on this part). I am getting closer now and I want to start. This will be piece meal in the beginning as I try get myself writing everyday. 

Moving from Mac to Linux as a whole has been something I have been yearning to do for ages, I think the first time I played with a Linux distro was back when I heard about Virtualbox in 2011. Up until then I had used Windows through school etc and it killed me. I always knew that computers could offer more but I am not clever enough to pursue too much all at once. Anyway, I got to university and had bought a Mac (Macbook Pro 7.1 mid 2010 - because details are nice) because I heard they are reliable and let's be honest right now, they are beautiful. Anyway, I will write some more on the whole hardware thing. So I realised after some time that Mac runs off a UNIX core and I didn't really know what that meant (I still don't really). I knew that it meant that the core was somewhat similar to Linux and I felt better about my move. I figured that the closer I got to Linux and Open Source the better I'd feel. I love the Open Source concept and sharing. I think it completely progressive and that the world is sutpid to think we will make any real developments if we sit in our own caves and make people pay to come in. I also believe that anyone should be able to use any piece of tech or knowledge or whatever in the world because possession is an illusion. However, we live in a world that doesn't listen to that motto so we as *open* peeps have to be careful and choose our friends wisely #jobsvsgates. To cut this shorter (@warning I am prone to excessive verbage - I expect comments to idicate that haha), I am now here, running my same Mac and I have taken the plunge into Linux completely. I realised in the middle of it several things which I will write more about, but two main ones: if you have your files like music, documents and pictures, the OS doesn't actually matter; do not underestimate the CLI in Linux, it has got power daymn! 

Just to give my post a general end goal, I want to show how nice the Fedora distro is running the Gnome desktop environment and how you will really enjoy it if you are a user like me, coming from a Mac. I will explain more on what kind of user I am but in a nutshell, I use a computer for very general things like admin, browsing, office stuff, bit of image editing and publishing kind of stuff, through to a bit of hobbytronics and all in all I use it to get stuff done. I don't game and I don't do a lot of heavy graphics stuff either. I feel a computer should work nicely for you (this is both hardware and software of course) and that looking at it should be pleasant. Finally I want to address this thing of Open Source and how it eats me up inside when I am not using something that is free for everyone. I want to comment on how using great hardware coupled with great software leads to an end user experience that epitomises the modern interface between a human and a machine.

To end off this intro I basically want to say that I hope you enjoy reading my musings on this change in my lifestyle, because I think a computer is part of your life. We communicate through them, we view information through them, and for many, we rely on them. 

### Fedora as an OS with Gnome

I should clarify that I mean __Fedora 26 workstation__ with Gnome Version **3.24.2**. I want to address what I consider an OS. Sure everyone, well not all but most, knows that an OS is the operating system of the machine. I just want to indicate that when you commit to an OS, you commit to a whole bunch of things. Now for developers and the like they will laugh at me for trying to define all this but I also want to reach people who are not overly tech savvy and want to read about tech in a way that it is nice to read. To do that, sorry tech guys, I have to write in a 'friendlier' way. When you choose an OS you choose a lot of stuff that is under the hood, you choose a lot of things like the policies that govern the developers and the background of the company or individuals that run and maintain that OS. You choose a lot of obvious things like how it looks, how it runs on your machine and as is becoming the hinge point for many between OSes, what software you can use. If you bear with me I will break down these things a little so you can see where I am coming from and perhaps this will help you to either agree with me or rather show your distaste in my opinion. 

So the list:
1. Under the hood of the GUI
2. Policies
3. Looks
4. How it runs on your machine
5. What software you can use

##### 1. Under the hood of the GUI

Before we go ahead here, please know I am no super power when it comes to knowledge of display servers (the nuts and bolts of the graphic user interface (GUI)). I only know some basics and that a display is like a program in itself and that lots of OSes use different 'programs' to show you the GUI. Like if you think back to MSDOS, you know the old fashioned computers that only had a cursor and a black screen. They were OSes that didn't have a display program and so no GUI. Everyone today who isn't totally tech savvy likes to see what a computer is doing, they don't always like the command line interface (CLI), the thing with the cursor and the blackness. When you dive into an OS like Windows you use the **windows** GUI manager. That is actually the namesake of Microsoft Windows, the display server, the program that runs the GUI. It is called windows because you work with 'windows', the squares and rectangles that surround a program you open. Like Outlook has its own box or window and you can click on things inside it and the computer knows you want to talk to Outlook and not to your desktop where some people keep folders and shortcuts. So now with Microsoft (MS) Windows you're using ``windows`` and that takes care of how you do things like resizing a program window to take up the whole screen or minimise it to the bar at the bottom. So to zoom out now, we have the display server or the program that runs the GUI, we have to try stick with display server to practise the correct lingo. MS Windows has ``windows`` and Mac has this program called **Quartz**, which is the low-level graphics layer, and the **WindowServer** process manages windows on top of it. Both are Apple proprietary software. I must offer thanks to [Daniel Beck](https://superuser.com/users/22317/daniel-beck) who answered this type of question on StackExchange. Now we get to Linux and there are a lot and I do not aim to go through them and how they work, but in general you have **X** as the display server and then you have your desktop environment that does its thing, here we have Gnome or Unity (the one Ubuntu uses, albeit not for long). Now in Fedroa 26, we have the new display server called **Wayland** and I am not totally savvy on it yet. The point here is that these display servers all have their own quirks and possibilities and of course issues. We take it for granted that in MS Windows the close button is usually a red cross in top right hand corner and on Mac you have the three coloured dots on the top left. In Linux this can be totally customised and in my Fedora Gnome set up I have only the cross on the top right. These buttons do something for you with that window you are in, now this is simple and obvious, i.e. the cross closes the window. But what happens under the hood is where I am heading. In MS Windows you press the close button and if that was the only window of that program open, you close and end the program, well you hope at least, thanks to MS Windows being dodgy and all closed source and stuff, but anyway. In Mac when you hit the red button (there is a cross as well) you close that window but you don't end the program. So for some this is easy to understand but for some who perhaps grew up on MS Windows, this doesn't make sense. So, you see my point, every interaction you have with the GUI has a certain background, or under the hood, operation. Now given that I am aiming at moving from Mac to Fedora, I am aiming to highlight this simple fact, pressing the cross on the top right (Fedora) closes the program like in MS Windows. Simple. 

I don't want to go into more, but I hope this example shows you what happens when you change OS and how that filters down to changing your display server and how that changes how you interact with your programs and their windows.

#### 2. Policies

This will be short because I don't really know anything about this but I do know what implcations come out of policies and how they impact the choice you make with which OS you use. The simple contrast comes here, Linux vs. MS and Mac. Linux is free, editable (i.e. it can be yours and the people who made it don't mind, in fact they think it's cool). MS and Mac are proprietary, they collect information about you and of course the bottom line is that if you want to obtain them legally, you have to pay. Sure MacOS is free to download but you either have to build a specific computer with the right hardware combination called a Hackintosh or buy a Mac (the physical computer) and they are very pricey in general. So If you are a pure business person and like making money out of people by making them pay for what you have done and so on, then sure keep using MS and Mac. It isn't of course easy to just change becasue it might not be you who is in charge of the machine you use, I have to use MS Windows at work, but on my own machine at home I can choose. This is where it matters, at least for the beginning. If you can conquer yourself, which took me some time, you can board the Open Source train and maybe one day open your own office where all the machines run Linux! 

#### 3. Looks

This bit I am not sure how to proceed because there is a lot to say but at the same time there is so much customisation,it is impossible to talk about everything. Before we get going, we need to take note of a few tricks that make the Mac always 'appear' beautiful. A Mac machine will always have a great screen. Colours will be lovely and rich and the graphics card will be powerful, in general at least. So, it is not fair to compare this to a Linux machine that has a rubbish screen with a cheap graphics card. I am talking about the looks of the OS. How our cross to close a window might look and the task bar at the top or bottom and so on. Imagine a beautiful screen because that's ideal and if you are moving like I did from Mac to Linux, the screen will be great. When you look at a desktop you as a person will like certain things. Coming from Mac you will know the task bar at the top and the dock at the bottom. You will know of mission control and the dashboard and the whole swipe between full screen apps etc. All these little things make up a total _look_. This is what I am talking about. On a Mac this has all been thought out really well and refined to the max, but can you get in there and play? The short answer is not very easily and in general _no_. Now, when you leave a Mac and open a desktop like Ubuntu with Unity you might think this is similar but I don't like the colours. You might open Cinnamon from the Mint community and think that it is just like MS Windows and you thought you were moving forward. Now, on Fedora with Gnome, just the default installation, a lot of the aesthetic is actually really good. Straight off there is no dock, so you might not like that. However, one press of the 'super' key,which if you haven't configured things yet, is the ``cmd`` key to the left of the space bar, will bring up all your open windows and a dock on the left with your favourite apps. On this dock you can click the square matrix of dots and get a mission-control-like list of your apps. To me this is great. I used have my dock on auto hide so that I could use all of the screen's real estate. This isn't the case for all, but once you start writing a lot or really get stuck into a program to get something done, the dock is in the way and taking up space. So while I was writing my thesis for my masters, I used to put the dock away and I got used to it being out the way. So when I started playing Fedora before I moved, I like the fact that there was no dock and that you could get one by ramming your mouse into the top left corner or hitting the ``cmd`` key. I also used to use the Mac shortcut of ``cmd``+``space`` to bring up Spotlight and I would launch apps from there because scrolling through lists, albeit beautiful and like an app drawer on a phone, it is a waste of time and you can easily lose a minute or more because you are tired and you can't spot the app you are after, this is assuming you don't keep it in the dock. So, the 'mission control' Fedora or rather Gnome style was actually perfect for me. You just ram the mouse in the corner and start typing your desired application and you're away. 

Now onto another little thing that I used to love about Mac and was worried I would not get on Linux without some huge effort on the CLI and tweaking and so on. I wanted a picture to be quickly previewed with the space bar while in the file manager. If you have the standard Fedora with Gnome install going, you will have a little app called **sushi** installed and that gives you the same behaviour. The app is actually based on the Mac concept. When I figured this out, I was so glad and it again re-affirmed I was moving in the right direction. OK so this bit isn't exactly about looks, but I suppose I also mean within my 'Looks' title the things you look at. That means that when you look at a file manager and want to look at photo quickly, you can either change your list view or hit the space or open an image viewer. All these are things you have to look at on the way to acheiving what you want to look at. So I guess this could also go into something like interacting with the OS but yeah, I am going to leave it here. 

My final one that has ranked highly enough to be in looks is the notification bubbles. On Mac these were really great. They even had functionality built into them based on what app they came from. They were beautifully overlayed the current program you were in and got out of the way quite quickly. In Gnome there are notifications that are so similar and really nice. These come out at the top of the screen in the middle and move and disappear just like tha Mac ones. So I was really happy with that. I write a lot of emails and when doing some thing publishing related it really helps to get a quick notification about an email if it comes in. 

Among many others, the above things are some of the touches I feel Gnome has added that make it lovely to use. 

#### 4. How it runs on your machine

So this bit is maybe something you have heard a lot about. 'Linux is so light; It can be run on old machines; It is really fast' and so on. Well I am afraid that it isn't all true because some Linux distros are really powerful and can be heavy in the graphics department. That said some are very light and will feel as if you have opened the app before even clicking on it. What matters here is that we want an OS that is as good as, and ideally, *better* than MacOS. So we have to choose something that is powerful and popular enough that you get support for a lot of hardware and of course a nice community to help you through the troubles of moving over. Lots of people think of Ubuntu here and rightly so. Ubuntu has it all, community, power and can run on many machines. However, for the moment, you get Unity, the Ubuntu desktop environment and this is not what everyone wants and I was sadly one of those. I don't like the colours of Unity and Ubuntu in general, I am a blue-grey-black person when it comes to machines. So Fedora is powerful, popular and has a great community. It is also has a great attitude toward Open Source. This can be tricky when trying to run it on a machine that is full of proprietary electronics like a Mac but there is plenty of help out there to get you through and my old 2010 Macbook runs it very well. In fact, as the Linux slogans boast, my machine has improved. I had issues with kernel extensions (the bits that external hardware add to your machine, like a printer for example will add a kernel extension and can cause your machine to not boot) when running MacOS and could often get stuck at the boot screen and the computer began its attempts to take off from the desk with its fans. Now for a person who isn't comfy with the CLI, a kernal panic is like crazy speak and you think, "Great, I have to go the Apple store and dish out cash to get my life(computer) back." Well, when you live in Africa, which is where I used to live, an Apple Store isn't always something that is just around the corner. As a result of living in the sticks (there will be a post on my life soon) I had to acquaint myself with the CLI and make friends with my machine's issues so that they didn't ruin my day. To end this off, when running Linux, the kernel is so advanced and well developed that you are very safe. From this side of things I have really been enjoying Fedora and I would **not** go back to Mac unless I got a new machine, which isn't going to happen because my machine is good now and E-waste is bad these days. 

#### 5. What software you can use

For me this is area is very user based and if you are the type who relies and only likes MS Office for example, then Linux isn't for you because there is a good chance you won't want to go through the sometimes interesting journey to getting MS things working. That said, it is possible to run MS programs so if you are open to tinkering and fiddling a bit then you are still OK. What matters to me with Linux is that it leads you to learning more about how much awesome open source programs are out there. When you think of a computer, as mentioned already, you think of something you want to do. Be it look something up online or produce an email or create a spreadsheet. Some of you out there will want more specific things obviously, but keeping this as variable as possible, you want to use the PC to do something. So, with Linux, you put in to say, the awesome Software centre in Gnome, a request like email or photography and you will get a list of software that is all open source and free for all to use and often also hackable. I find this exciting because when you commit to Linux as your daily driver (the thing you use everyday and not just for fun), you experience a combination of having to use open source which is good lesson I think and you get excited because you can see how much there is out there that is free. You can practically do anything on a computer and the only thing you will have to have paid for is the machine itself. However, some reading this, I hope at leaast, will want to see how I do things for a comparison. So here we go:
- I use Thunderbird for emails
- I use Firefox for browsing, with DuckDuckGo
- I use Gnome Music for listening to music, which is exactly like iTunes minus the store part and Spotify (there is great native app for Linux)
- I use the Gnome terminal app for the CLI
- I use LateXilla for LateX related stuff
- I use Abicontrine for MarkDown related stuff, if I am not use Prose online
- I use Shotwell to manage my photos, which is actually exactly like iPhoto
- I use the nautilus file explorer that comes standard with Gnome, which is gorgeous and better than Finder I think
- I use the pinch gesture on the touchpad to zoom out of apps and four finger pull or push to change workspaces and so apps if you set it up right
- I use Night shift for screen temperature management, it is in built in Gnome and ideal
- I use the Libre suite for office stuff and it is great, special mention to Draw, it is brilliant
- I use Krita and Inkscape for tablet and drawing stuff
- I use jrnl for my journal and I make entries in it through Sublime text
- I make general text doc alterations with gedit which can also do MarkDown stuff which I have been testing

#### The end

As a first entry toward describing my move from Mac, I hope this provides some insight for any prospective changers. I hope that the more I get into this I will provide more insights. 

If you have read this far, awesome and thank you!
